# Prerequisites

For working on this theme, you need:  
- basic knowledge of QGIS  
- basic knowledge of remote sensing data resolution

# Principles of multispectral imaging

Presentation of multispectral data characteristics and their potential
in environmental applications.

## Objectives

In this theme, you will learn about:

-   …  
-   …

After finishing this theme you will be able to visualise multispectral
data and spectral characteristics for different objects from different
sensors and to calculate selected vegetation indices.

## Spectral ranges in optical domain

<span style="color:red;">**(bridge with Module 1 - content to be
agreed)**</span>

## Use of different ranges

<span style="color:red">**(bridge with Module 1 - content to be
agreed)**</span>

## Selected sensor characteristics

<span style="color:red">**(bridge with Module 1 - content to be
agreed)**</span>

-   MODIS, Landsat, Sentinel, PlanetScope, RapidEye…  
-   RGB composites, visualisation

<div>

<b>Table 1. Selected satellite sensor characteristics.</b>

</div>

## Spectral indices

<span style="color:red">**(bridge with Module 1 - content to be
agreed)**</span>

-   concept  
-   calculation

## Advantages and limitations of satellite multispectral imaging

The use of many spectral bands allows for wider interpretation and
analysis possibilities of objects than in the case of RGB photographs.
Having **red-edge, near and mid-infrared** bands strengthens them even
more in **vegetation analyses**. The width of the spectral bands is of
great importance here, which varies depending on the sensor (see
comparison between Landsat 7 and 8 bands with Sentinel-2 in [Theme 1 in
Module
1](#../../module1/01_principles_of_remote_sensing_time_series/01_principles_of_remote_sensing_time_series.md).

Satellite level of data acquisition has the advantage that it is
possible to acquire scenes with regular temporal resolution of images,
which allows to fully explore their potential in multitemporal analyses.
The limitation, however, is that despite the cyclical nature of data
acquisition, it happens that for a selected area for a long time it is
not possible to find cloudless imagery, for data provided free of
charge, which is performed at a specific interval, and not on request.
However, for the latter, this can also be a challenge.

**Table 2** lists the main pros and cons of satellite multispectral
image data acquisition in general, however it is obvious that individual
missions differ in technical parameters, which is presented in Table 1
above. Multispectral data can also be obtained from the airborne or UAV
level, similarly, hyperspectral data in planned missions are to be
obtained from the satellite platforms, but since this Module deals with
multispectral satellite data, the information in the table applies to
them.

<div>

<b>Table 2. Advantages and limitations of satellite multispectral
imaging.</b>

</div>

## Multispectral satellite data archives

<span style="color:red">**(bridge with Module 1 - content to be
agreed)**</span>

The wide range of Earth observation missions by various government
agencies and private companies means that the **number of available
sources with access to satellite data is increasing every year**. The
vast amount of information requires that the data be properly catalogued
and offered to the end user in as simple a form as possible so that they
can easily find the data relevant to the applications and effects they
wish to obtain. It also offers access to the computing power to find,
process, and analyse multi-temporal (and sometimes multi-sensor)
collections in some cases within a single platform. The large data
archive services of major national and international government agencies
such as NASA or ESA and the major private companies that provide cloud
space and computing power are filled with data from many different
missions. Smaller archives often offer more specialised data from
smaller satellite missions or processed to a level that allows analysis
in selected areas.

Data available in archives can be divided by several characteristics.
Archives offering free access are most often projects of agencies (that
own the satellites), universities, and enthusiast communities.
Commercially available data are owned by companies that operate private
satellites and repositories of data from them. Some of the preprocessed
Analysis Ready Data may also sometimes be available for a fee.
Commercial parties often offer a free sample of data or a trial plan to
get you acquainted with the service. All services may offer tools for
**searching, browsing, downloading, processing and analysing data**.
Some offer multiple functionalities simultaneously. Depending on the
user’s needs and level of sophistication, they can be operated using a
graphical interface or, in some cases, also using a programming console
and API. Large fragmentation and multiplicity of possibilities, apart
from many advantages of such a solution, also make it necessary to spend
time on selection of appropriate sources, which may require creating
multiple accounts in different services and the necessity of learning
how to use them.

The Table 3 below consists of multiple different purposes and content
platforms available in English containing optical satellite imagery. We
chose to present archives not related to just one area or missions,
albeit those services can be useful for a specific purpose. Short list
of such platforms can be found below.

<div>

<b>Table 3. Selected satellite data platforms.</b>

</div>

## Exercise

Object identification, image interpretation and spectral properties
analysis in [QGIS](../../software/software_qgis.md).

### Next unit

Proceed with [Temporal information in satellite
data](../02_temporal_information/02_temporal_information.md)
